Move subscribe events section from connecting-endpoints page to subscribing-to-events-page in Lisk docs (#1849)
LiskHQ/lisk-docs: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/integrate-blockchain/subscribing-to-events.adoc

:idprefix:
:idseparator: -
:imagesdir: ../../assets/images

:docs_sdk: v6@lisk-sdk::
//External URLs
:url_npm_lisk_sdk: https://www.npmjs.com/package/lisk-sdk
:url_lip_65: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lips/blob/main/proposals/lip-0065.md
:JSON_RPC_Specs: https://www.jsonrpc.org/specification
:url_lisk_service_repo: https://github.com/LiskHQ/lisk-service/blob/v0.7.0-beta.3/docs/api/websocket_subscribe_api.md#lisk-service-subscribe-api-documentation
// Project URLs
:url_advanced_rpc: api/lisk-node-rpc.adoc
// :url_references_elements_apiclient: {sdk_docs}references/lisk-elements/api-client.adoc
// :url_references_elements_client: {sdk_docs}references/lisk-elements/client.adoc

> :url_references_elements_apiclient: {sdk_docs}references/typedoc/modules/lisk_api_client.adoc
> :url_references_elements_client: {sdk_docs}references/typedoc/classes/lisk-elements/client.adoc

Reviewer: These two lines generate the warning mentioned in the screenshot above. Please remove these two lines. 
```suggestion

```

:url_advanced_rpc_endpoints: {url_advanced_rpc}#endpoints
:url_lisk_service_pubsub: ROOT::api/lisk-service-pubsub.adoc

:url_sdk_config_system: {docs_sdk}config.adoc#system
:url_understand_events: {url_advanced_rpc}#events
:url_chain_get_event: {url_advanced_rpc}#chain_getevents
:url_understand_rpc_events: understand-blockchain/sdk/rpc.adoc#rpc-events
:url_understand_blockchain_events: understand-blockchain/sdk/modules-commands.adoc#blockchain-events
:url_understand_ws_events: understand-blockchain/sdk/rpc.adoc
:url_sync_store: build-blockchain/plugin/plugin-class.adoc#sync-and-store-new-event
:url_create_blockchain_event: build-blockchain/module/blockchain-event.adoc

// TODO: Update the page by uncommenting the hyperlinks once the updated pages are available.

====
On this page you'll learn about how events can be subscribed to, or retrieved from a Lisk blockchain.

Specifically the following topics are covered:

. Lisk application
.. The difference between WS events and blockchain events
.. Subscribing to a WS event
.. Retrieving a blockchain event
. Lisk Service
.. Subscribing to events
====

== Lisk Application

=== The difference between WS events and blockchain events

> The Lisk blockchain generates various events that emit on-chain data.

Author: Good idea, I have added in an link as suggested 👍

// update the following links etc., regarding RPC : now WS and not RPC
// The emitted events can either be xref:{url_understand_rpc_events}[xxxWS Events] or xref:{url_understand_blockchain_events}[Blockchain Events].
The emitted events can either be xref:{url_understand_ws_events}[WebSocket] or xref:{url_understand_blockchain_events}[Blockchain] events.
The aforementioned events are different in terms of when and how they are *generated*, and also how these events can be *accessed*.

// Lisk makes *WS events* accessible to everyone by offering xref:{url_understand_events}[a range ofxxxWS  RPC-based events].

Lisk makes *WS events* accessible to everyone
These events can be subscribed to by anyone in the network.
The subscribers can then get real-time information about the subscribed event, for example, the generation of a new block on the network, the addition of a new transaction in the transaction pool, a round state change event, etc.

> WS events offered by Lisk can be subscribed to directly by any plugin, external service, or application.

Reviewer 2: Can we also specify that there can only be 8 `WS events` emitted and list the following?

- network_ready
- network_newBlock
- network_newTransaction
- chain_forked
- chain_newBlock
- chain_deleteBlock
- chain_validatorsChanged
- txpool_newTransaction

Author: Sure, it is now done 👍

:url_advanced_rpc: api/lisk-node-rpc.adoc
// :url_references_elements_apiclient: {sdk_docs}references/lisk-elements/api-client.adoc
// :url_references_elements_client: {sdk_docs}references/lisk-elements/client.adoc
:url_references_elements_apiclient: {sdk_docs}references/lisk-elements/api-client.adoc
:url_references_elements_client: {sdk_docs}references/lisk-elements/client.adoc
:url_advanced_rpc_endpoints: {url_advanced_rpc}#endpoints

> :url_lisk_service_pubsub: ROOT::api/lisk-service-pubsub.adoc

Reviewer: Should point to the `beta` version, not the `default`.

:url_sdk_config_system: {docs_sdk}config.adoc#system
:url_understand_events: {url_advanced_rpc}#events
:url_chain_get_event: {url_advanced_rpc}#chain_getevents
:url_understand_rpc_events: understand-blockchain/sdk/rpc.adoc#rpc-events
:url_understand_blockchain_events: understand-blockchain/sdk/modules-commands.adoc#blockchain-events
:url_understand_ws_events: understand-blockchain/sdk/rpc.adoc
:url_sync_store: build-blockchain/plugin/plugin-class.adoc#sync-and-store-new-event
:url_create_blockchain_event: build-blockchain/module/blockchain-event.adoc
:url_lisk_blockchain: understand-blockchain/index.adoc#what-is-the-lisk-blockchain

// TODO: Update the page by uncommenting the hyperlinks once the updated pages are available.

====
On this page you'll learn about how events can be subscribed to, or retrieved from a Lisk blockchain.

Specifically the following topics are covered:

. Lisk Application
.. The difference between JSON-RPC events and blockchain events
.. Subscribing to a JSON-RPC event
.. Retrieving a blockchain event
. Lisk Service

> .. Subscribing to events

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
.. Subscribing to WS events
```

====

== Lisk Application

> === The difference between JSON-RPC events and blockchain events

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== The difference between JSON-RPC events and Blockchain events
```

The xref:{url_lisk_blockchain}[Lisk blockchain] generates various events that emit on-chain data.

> // update the following links etc., regarding RPC : now WS and not RPC
> // The emitted events can either be xref:{url_understand_rpc_events}[xxxWS Events] or xref:{url_understand_blockchain_events}[Blockchain Events].
> The emitted events can either be xref:{url_understand_ws_events}[WebSocket] or xref:{url_understand_blockchain_events}[Blockchain] events.
> The aforementioned events are different in terms of when and how they are *generated*, and also how these events can be *accessed*.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// update the following links etc., regarding RPC : now JSON-RPC and not RPC
// The emitted events can either be xref:{url_understand_rpc_events}[JSON-RPC Events] or xref:{url_understand_blockchain_events}[Blockchain Events].
The emitted events can either be xref:{url_understand_ws_events}[JSON-RPC] or xref:{url_understand_blockchain_events}[Blockchain] events.
The aforementioned events are different in terms of when and how they are *generated*, and also how these events can be *accessed*.
```

> // Lisk makes *JSON-RPC events* accessible to everyone by offering xref:{url_understand_events}[a range ofxxxWS  RPC-based events].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// Lisk makes *JSON-RPC events* accessible to everyone by offering xref:{url_understand_events}[a range of JSON-RPC-based events].
```

> Lisk makes *JSON-RPC events* accessible to everyone.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Lisk API client makes *JSON-RPC events* easily accessible to everyone.
```

These events can be subscribed to by anyone in the network.

> The subscribers can then get real-time information about the subscribed event, for example, the generation of a new block on the network, the addition of a new transaction in the transaction pool, a round state change event, etc.
> To clarify this in more detail, only the following `JSON-RPC events` listed below can be emitted:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The subscribers can then get real-time information about the subscribed event, for example, the generation of a new block on the network, the addition of a new transaction in the transaction pool, a round state change event, etc. There are only eight known `JSON-RPC events` that can be emitted, and are as following:
```

- `network_ready`
- `network_newBlock`
- `network_newTransaction`
- `chain_forked`
- `chain_newBlock`
- `chain_deleteBlock`
- `chain_validatorsChanged`

> - `txpool_newTransaction`

Author: Yes, that would be another option, although Sameer recommended we display the events here.

Due to this, events from only those 300 blocks can be retrieved, by default. 
This can be changed by updating the `*keepEventsForHeights*` property in the xref:{url_sdk_config_system}[node configuration].

To store the blockchain events on a node permanently, set `*keepEventsForHeights*` to `-1` in the node configuration.
====

=== Subscribing to a JSON-RPC event

> The API client simplifies the JSON-RPC event subscription process not only for a blockchain client but also for the external plugins and services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The API client simplifies the JSON-RPC event subscription process not only for a blockchain client but also for external plugins and services.
```

--
=====

> 

Reviewer 2: Can we please replace the `IPC API client example` script with the following? It's a minor refactoring to keep both the scripts consistent.

```node
const { apiClient } = require('@liskhq/lisk-client');
let clientCache;
const nodePath = '~/.lisk/my-app';

const getClient = async () => {
    if (!clientCache) {
        clientCache = await apiClient.createIPCClient(nodePath);
    }
    return clientCache;
};

getClient().then((client) => {
    client.subscribe('network_newBlock', (data) => {
    console.log('new block: ', data);
    });
});
```

Reviewer 2: Please replace the following lines for the `WS API client example` script as well 🙏 

```node
getClient().then((client) => {
    client.subscribe('network_newBlock', (data) => {
    console.log('new block: ', data);
    });
});
```

Author: Done 👍

> === Retrieving a blockchain event

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Retrieving a Blockchain event
```

> With each block execution, various events are generated and stored in the event log.
> For example, modules such as `Reward` emit the `rewardMinted` event after each block execution.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With each block execution, various events are generated and stored in the event log, and can offer various insights.
For example, the `dynamicReward` module emits the `rewardMinted` event after each block execution. It offers information about the exact reward earned for block generation by the block generator.
```

> NOTE: In contrast to JSON-RPC events, blockchain events cannot be directly subscribed to.
> Instead, *blockchain events are requested for a particular block height* and are provided as a parameter in the request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
NOTE: In contrast to JSON-RPC events, Blockchain events cannot be directly subscribed to.
Instead, *Blockchain events are requested for a particular block height*, which must be provided as a parameter in the request.
```

To fetch such an event, we can use the xref:{url_chain_get_event}[chain_getEvents] endpoint, as shown below:

> 

Reviewer 2: We can remove `.fetchBlockchainEvent.js` from L165.

.Make sure your blockchain client is running before executing the script
[source,bash]
----
Reward minted event: {
  data: '08001000',
  index: 0,
  module: 'reward',
  name: 'rewardMinted',
  topics: [ '03', 'aa84845c4bc4e75802921fc315a01576c75ade73' ],
  height: 60
}
Reward minted event data: { amount: 0n, reduction: 0 }
----
====

== Lisk Service
=== Subscribing to WS events

The Lisk Service Subscribe API allows subscribing to the WS events to receive real-time updates or notifications, as shown in the example below.
A detailed list of all available emitted events are available in the xref:{url_lisk_service_pubsub}[Publish/Subscribe API (Lisk Service)] page.

> Lisk Service utilizes the WebSocket library to facilitate two-way communication, ensuring users are kept informed about blockchain network and market changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lisk Service utilizes the WebSocket library to facilitate two-way communication, ensuring users are kept informed about a blockchain network and market changes.
```

> Further updated information regarding WS events generated by Lisk Service can also be found here in the {url_lisk_service_repo}[Lisk Service] GitHub repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Further updated information regarding WS events generated by Lisk Service can also be found here in the {url_lisk_service_repo}[Lisk Service^] GitHub repository.
```

> .Make sure your blockchain client is running before executing the script

Reviewer 2: Please replace L196-L206 with:

```node
getClient().then((client) => {
    // Returns the encoded event based on the 'height' passed
    client.invoke(
        "chain_getEvents",
        { height: 60 },
    ).then(events =>
        // Filter out the 'rewardMinted' event
        const rewardMintedEvent = events.find(e => e.name === 'rewardMinted');

        // Decode the aforementioned event's data by passing relevant schema and the encoded 'data'
        const parsedEventData = codec.decode(rewardMintedDataSchema, Buffer.from(rewardMintedEvent.data, 'hex'));

        // Print the event and the contained data
        console.log("Reward minted event: ", rewardEvent);
        console.log("Reward minted event data: ", parsedEventData);
    });
});
```

[tabs]
=====
Subscribe - Specific event::
+
--
[source,js]
----
const io = require('socket.io-client');

const subscriptionEndpoint = 'wss://service.lisk.com/blockchain';
const eventName = 'new.block';

const socket = io(
 	subscriptionEndpoint,
 	{
 		forceNew: true,
 		transports: ['websocket'],
 	},
 );

socket.on(
 	eventName,
 	(eventPayload) => {
 		console.log(`Event: ${eventName}`);
 		console.log('Payload:', JSON.stringify(eventPayload, null, 2), '\n');
 	}
 );
----
--
Subscribe - All events::
+
--
[source,js]
----
const io = require('socket.io-client');

const subscriptionEndpoint = 'wss://service.lisk.com/blockchain';

const socket = io(
 	subscriptionEndpoint,
 	{
 		forceNew: true,
 		transports: ['websocket'],
 	},
 );

 const onevent = socket.onevent;
 socket.onevent = function (packet) {
     const args = packet.data || [];
     onevent.call (this, packet);
     packet.data = ['*'].concat(args);
     onevent.call(this, packet);
 };

 socket.on(
 	'*',
 	(eventName, eventPayload) => {
 		console.log(`Event: ${eventName}`);
 		console.log('Payload:', JSON.stringify(eventPayload, null, 2), '\n');
 	}
 );
----
--
=====

> // Subscribe-Specific event code snippet to be updated.

Author: Done 👍

.Make sure your blockchain client is running before executing the script
[source,bash]
----
Reward minted event: {
  data: '08001000',
  index: 0,
  module: 'reward',
  name: 'rewardMinted',
  topics: [ '03', 'aa84845c4bc4e75802921fc315a01576c75ade73' ],
  height: 60
}
Reward minted event data: { amount: 0n, reduction: 0 }
----
====

> == Lisk Service

Author: OK, I have mentioned this and referenced the appropriate link here 👍

=== Subscribing to WS events
The Lisk Service Subscribe API allows subscribing to the WS events to receive real-time updates or notifications, as shown in the example below.
A detailed list of all available emitted events are available in the xref:{url_lisk_service_pubsub}[Publish/Subscribe API (Lisk Service)] page.

=====
--
[source,js]
----

const io = require('socket.io-client');

const subscriptionEndpoint = 'wss://service.lisk.com/blockchain';

const socket = io(
 	subscriptionEndpoint,
 	{
 		forceNew: true,
 		transports: ['websocket'],
 	},
 );

const { onevent } = socket;
socket.onevent = function (packet) {
    const args = packet.data || [];
    onevent.call(this, packet);
    packet.data = ['*'].concat(args);
    onevent.call(this, packet);
};

const subscribe = subscribeEvent => {
	socket.on(
		subscribeEvent,
		(...args) => {
			let eventName;
			let eventPayload;

			if (subscribeEvent === '*') {
				[eventName, eventPayload] = args;
			} else {
				eventName = subscribeEvent;
				[eventPayload] = args;
			}

			console.log(`Event: ${eventName}`);
			console.log('Payload:', JSON.stringify(eventPayload, null, 2), '\n');
		},
	);
};

> /* Subscribe to all the events */

Reviewer: I would also add a response to the aforementioned subscription to aid the reader.

Author: Done 👍

Decoded data: { amount: 0n, reduction: 0 }
----
====

== Lisk Service

> === Subscribing to events

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
=== Subscribing to WS events
```

> The Lisk Service Subscribe API allows subscribing to events to receive real-time updates or notifications, as shown in the example below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Lisk Service Subscribe API allows subscribing to the WS events to receive real-time updates or notifications, as shown in the example below.
```

A detailed list of all available emitted events are available in the xref:{url_lisk_service_pubsub}[Publish/Subscribe API (Lisk Service)] page.

=====
--
[source,js]
----

const io = require('socket.io-client');

const subscriptionEndpoint = 'wss://service.lisk.com/blockchain';

const socket = io(
 	subscriptionEndpoint,
 	{
 		forceNew: true,
 		transports: ['websocket'],
 	},
 );

const { onevent } = socket;
socket.onevent = function (packet) {
    const args = packet.data || [];
    onevent.call(this, packet);
    packet.data = ['*'].concat(args);
    onevent.call(this, packet);
};

const subscribe = subscribeEvent => {
	socket.on(
		subscribeEvent,
		(...args) => {
			let eventName;
			let eventPayload;

			if (subscribeEvent === '*') {
				[eventName, eventPayload] = args;
			} else {
				eventName = subscribeEvent;
				[eventPayload] = args;
			}

			console.log(`Event: ${eventName}`);
			console.log('Payload:', JSON.stringify(eventPayload, null, 2), '\n');
		},
	);
};

/* Subscribe to all the events */
subscribe('*');

/* Subscribe to specific events */
// subscribe('new.block');
--
=====

> // Subscribe-Specific event code snippet to be updated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
